So as we get into the final portions of the lesson,
let's talk a little bit about
the regulatory landscape that your AI models would need to operate in.
Let's try to demystify some of the medical device regulation.
Note that in this section we will talk about mostly USA regulations,
about regulatory bodies like FDA and about laws like HIPAA,
but general principles used in the USA are very similar in other countries.
Also know that as a data scientist,
it is unlikely you will be responsible for all of that and for passing
all the regulatory hurdles but at the same time,
it is important for you to understand what's involved so that you
can speak to the lawyers who will be navigating that the same language.
So as we have been interacting with
different tools throughout this lesson and the course in general,
you might have noticed all these notices that the tools have.
Like OHIF says investigational use only.
RadiAnt image viewer says that it's not a medical product and is not FDA certified.
Slicer have also a disclaimer that says that
Slicer is not an FDA approved medical device.
What are these notices and why are they there?
So first FDA is the USA based regulatory body,
which the acronym stands for Foods and Drugs Administration.
This is a regulatory body that regulates products which are marketed to hospitals.
Know specifically the marketed piece.
So FDA regulates things that you are trying to sell to hospitals.
For example, if you deploy a segmentation network and put it into
GitHub repository and you say that this is an example of how to
apply U-Net to segment brain volumes,
it is unlikely that FDA will come after you.
But at the same time,
if you take the segmentation network,
wrap it into a tool,
put it up on the website and claim that this is
the best AI-based software for processing brain tumors,
it is likely that FDA would be interested
and it would be treated as if you are marketing this to a hospital.
So as we have mentioned,
FDA regulates medical devices.
What is a medical device?
Note that in regulatory speak,
the language of FDA and other regulatory bodies,
device does not necessarily mean a physical device like
a surgical scalpel or a CT scanner or an MRI scanner.
It could also mean a software device like a pack system or
a medical image viewer or maybe an AI algorithm on its own.
Let's look at this screenshot from FDA website
where the definition of a medical device is clearly written.
The definition says that, "A medical device is an instrument, apparatus,
machine or implant or other things which is intended
for use in the diagnosis of disease or other condition or in the cure,
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in men or other animals."
This gives you an idea of what the thinking is.
If your system is not intended to diagnose anything or to treat anything,
most likely it will not fall under the definition of medical device.
But at the same time, this definition is not very definitive.
It is a little bit broad and that's why FDA website is actually pretty good
at giving a lot of guidance and a lot of clarification on what exactly is being meant.
A lot of this material is available online.
If you ever want to dig into that, you are welcome to.
It is quite easy to navigate.
Remember that most likely the final determination of whether
your algorithm is a medical device or is not is better be made with lawyers.
But at the same time, you can go pretty far if you try to explore on your own.
So let's look at this snippets from FDA's medical device classification guidance.
FDA says that in order,
"To determine if your product meets the definition of a medical device,
you should define intended use and indication of use for your product."
This is what it's all about.
It is really about how do you think about your device,
what it's being used for.
Again, coming back to the example of segmentation neural network.
A neural network which produces, for example,
volumes for a clinical research archive
and populates an archive which is used in the clinic,
but maybe used for research workloads might not be a medical device.
The same segmentation network,
which is deployed into a clinical image viewer and which
presents the segmentations to a radiologist would likely be a medical device.
It is all about the intended use and about how
the algorithm is designed to be applied in the clinic.
One other thing that is important to be kept in mind is that as
you are getting your device through the FDA regulation process,
you will likely come through the notion of classification.
There are three classes of medical devices that FDA defines and these are risk classes.
There is Class I, Class II,
and Class III medical devices.
A Class I device would be a device that presents a low risk to the patient,
like a stethoscope, for example.
A Class II device would be a moderate to high risk to the patient or user of the device,
like diagnostic imaging software, for example.
If you do something wrong and display the image wrong,
there is a moderate risk that misinterpretation would be made.
The Class III device would be a device with a high risk to the patient.
Things like cardiac defibrillator, for example,
or a surgical robot would fall under the definition of Class III medical device.
Depending on which category AI algorithm would fall into,
your algorithm would need to comply with
a different set of requirements and different set of regulations.
We will take a little bit of a glimpse into
what types of requirements you might be dealing with.
Also keep in mind, FDA is actually eyeing the medical imaging AI space and it's
evolving it's volume of
regulations to try to adapt to the way that AI systems are being built.